the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu thank you
so okay let's
continue with vector
and operations on them so remember
yesterday we saw the topic yesterday was
dot
product
and remember the definition of dot
product well the dot product of two
vectors is obtained
by multiplying the first component with
the first component the second with the
second and so on and summing these and
you get the scalar and the geometric
interpretation of
that is that you can also take the
length of a take the length of B
multiply them and multiply that by the
coine of the angle between the two
vectors so we've seen several
applications of
that
so one application is to
find lengths and
angles
so for example well you can use this
relation to give you that the cosine of
the angle between two vectors
is their dot product divided by
the product of the
lengths another application that we
have is to
detect whether two vectors are
perpendicular so to decide if two
vectors are perpendicular to each other
all we have to do is compute their dot
product and see if we get
zero
okay
and well one third application that we
didn't have time to discuss yesterday
that I will mention very quickly is to
find
components of so let's say find the
component of a vector a
along a
Direction
U so some unit
Vector so let me
explain let's say that I have some
direction for example the horizontal
axis on this Blackboard but it could be
any direction in space and to describe
this direction maybe I have a unit
Vector along this
axis let's say that I
have any other Vector a and I want to
find out what is the component of a
along U so that means what is the
length of this projection of a to the
given
Direction okay so this thing here is the
component of
a along
U well how do we find
that
well
we know that here we have a right angle
so this component is just length a times
cosine of the angle between a and
u but now that means actually we can
compute it very
easily because well I could you know
that's the same as length a time length
U * cosine Theta because U is a unit
Vector it's a unit Vector that means
this is equal to
one and so that's the same as the dot
product between a and
u okay so that's very easy and of course
the most obvious cases of that is say
for example we want just to find the
component along I hat the first axis you
know the unit Vector along the x axis
then you do the dot product with IH hat
which is 1 0 0 what you get is the first
component and that's in the X component
of the vector similarly say you want the
Z component you do the dot product with
K that gives you the last component of
your
vector but the same works with a unit
Vector in any
direction okay so what's an application
of
that well for example in physics maybe
you have seen situations where you have
a pendulum that swings so you have maybe
some mass at the end of a string and
that mass swings back and forth on a
circle and to analyze this mechanically
you want to use of course Newton lows of
mechanics and you want to use well you
know forces and so on but I claim that
components of vectors are useful here to
understand what happens
geometrically
so what are the forces exerted on this
pendulum well there's its
weight which usually points
downwards and there's the tension of the
string and these two forces together are
what explains how this pendulum is going
to move back and forth
now you could try to understand the
equations of motion using X Y
coordinates or maybe XZ or whatever you
want to call them let's say
XY
but really what causes the pendulum to
swing back and
forth and also to somehow stay at
constant
distance are phenomena relative to this
circular trajectory so for example maybe
instead of taking components along the X
and Y axis we want to look at two other
unit vectors so we can look
at a vector let's call it t that's
tangent to the
trajectory sorry can you read that maybe
it's not very readable
so
T is
tangent to the trajectory
and on the other hand we can introduce
another Vector it's call that
n and that one
is normal or perpendicular to the
trajectory and so now if you think about
it you can look at the components of the
weight along the tensent direction and
along the normal
Direction and
so the component of
f along the tension direction is what
causes acceleration in the direction
along the trajectory it's what causes
the pendulum to swing back and
forth
and the
component along n on the other
hand so that's the part of the weight
that tends to
pull our Mass away from this point is
what's going to be responsible for the
tension of the string it's why the
string is tot and not
slack and you know with things moving
all over the place uh so that one is
responsible for the tension of a
string and now of course if you want to
compute things well maybe you will call
this angle Theta and then you will
Express things explicitly using SS and
cosines and you will solve for the
equations of motion okay that be very
interesting physics problem but to save
time we're not going to do it I'm sure
you've seen that in 801 or similar
classes
but and so to find these components we
would just do dot
products okay any
questions no okay so let's move on to
our next topic
so here we have found things about
lengths
angles and uh stuff like that one
important concept that we haven't
understood yet in terms of vectors is
area so let's say that you know we want
to
find the area of this Pentagon well how
do we compute that using vectors can we
do it using vectors
yes we can and uh that's going to be the
goal but how so the first thing we
should do is probably simplify the
problem you know we don't actually need
to bother with pentagons all we need to
know are triangles because for example
you can cut that into three triangles
and then sum the areas of the
triangles okay
so perhaps
easier what's the area of a
triangle so let's start with you know a
triangle in the
plane and well then we need two vectors
to describe it say A and B
here how do we find the area of a
triangle well we all know base time
height over two so what's the base
what's the height well so the area of
this triangle is going to be 1/2 of the
base is going to be the length of a and
the
height well if you call Theta this angle
then this is length B sin
Theta now that looks a lot like the
formula we had there except for one
little catch this is a sign instead of a
cosine how do we deal with that
well what we could
do is first find the cosine of the angle
we know how to find the cosine of the
angle using dot
product then solve for S
using sin square plus cosine Square =
1 and then plug that back into here well
that works but it's kind of a very
complicated way of doing it so there's
an easier way and that's going to be
determinants but let me explain how we
get to that maybe still doing Elementary
geometry and Dot products
first
so let's
see what we can do is instead of finding
the S of theta well we're not good at
finding signs of angles but we are very
good now at finding cosines angles so
maybe we can find another angle whose
cosine is the same as the S of
theta well you probably heard about
complimentary angles and how you know if
I take my Vector
a have my Vector B here I have an angle
Theta well let's say that I rotate my
Vector a by 90 to get a new Vector a
prime okay so a
prime
is just a
rotated by
90 then the angle between these two
guys let's say Theta
Prime well Theta Prime is 90 Dees of 2
radians minus Theta so in particular
cosine of theta Prime is equal to S of
theta so in
particular that means
that length a length
B sin Theta which is what we would need
to know in order to find the area of
this triangle is equal to well a and a
prime have the same length so let me
replace that by length of a prime okay
I'm not changing
anything length B cosine Theta
Prim and now with have something that's
much easier for us because that's just a
prime
B okay so that looks like a very good
plan there's only one small thing which
is we don't know yet how to find this a
prime well I claim it's not very
hard let's
see why don't you guys do do the hard
work
so let's say that I have a plain Vector
a with two components A1 A2 and I want
to rotate it counterclockwise by
so it looks like maybe we should change
some signs somewhere maybe we should do
something with the
components um can you come up with an
idea of what it might
be okay so I I see a lot of people
answering
fre I see some other answers but the
majority vot seems to be number
three minus A2 and A1 I think I agree so
let's
see let's say that we
have this Vector
a with
components
A1 so A1 is here and A2 so A2 is here
okay let's rotate this box by 90
counterclockwise
so this rectangular box ends up there
it's the same box just flipped on its
side so this length here becomes A1 and
this length here becomes A2 and that
means our new Vector a prime
is going to be well the first component
looks like an A2 but it's pointing to
the left when A2 is positive so actually
it's minus
A2 and the Y component is going to be
the same as this guy so it's going to be
A1
okay if you wanted instead to rotate
clockwise then you would do the opposite
you would do A2 minus A1
okay is that reasonably clear for
everyone
okay
so well let's continue that calculation
there a prime we've
decided is minus A2 A1 so minus A2 A1
dot product with let's call B1 and B2
the components of B
then that will
be well minus A2 B1 plus A1 B2 let me
write that the other way around A1 B2
minus A2
B1 and that's a quantity that you may
already know under the name of
determinant of vectors A and
B which we write
symbolically using this notations so we
put a and b next to each other inside a
2X two table and we put this vertical
bars and that means the determinant of
these numbers it means this guy times
this guy minus this guy time this
guy okay so that's called the
determinant
and geometrically what it
measures is the area well not of a
triangle because we didn't divide by two
but of a parallelogram formed by A and B
so it measures the
area of the parallelogram with
sides A and
B and of course if you want the triangle
then you will just divide by two the
triangle is half a
parallelogram
uh there's one small catch the area
usually is something that's going to be
positive this guy here has no reason to
be positive or negative
because in
fact well if you compute things you will
see that whether it's positive or
negative depends on
whether A and B are clockwise or
counterclockwise from each other I mean
the issue that we have well when we say
the area is 12 length a length B sin
Theta that was assuming that Theta is
positive that it's s is positive
otherwise if Theta is negative maybe we
need actually to take the absolute value
of this so just to be more truful I will
say the determinant is either plus or
minus the
area okay any questions about this
yes uh uh oh sorry that's not the dot
product that's a usual multiplication
okay that's a length a * length B * sin
Theta what is that equal and so that's
equal to the area of a parallelogram so
let me explain that again
so if I have two vectors A and
B so I can form a parallelogram with
them or I can form a triangle okay and
so the area of a
parallelogram is equal to length a
length B sin Theta is equal to the
determinant of A and
B while the
area of a
triangle is2 of
that and again to be hopeful I should
say these things can be positive or
negative so depending on whether you
count the angle positively or negatively
you will get either the area or minus
the area the area is actually the
absolute value of this
quantities okay is that
clear
okay yes
sorry so if you want to compute the area
you will just take the absolute value of
a determinant okay
so our here will
be well I should say the area of the
parallelogram so that it's completely
clear um sorry you have a
question
explain again sorry what's the question
how the determinant equals the area of a
parallelogram okay so the area of a
parallelogram it's going to be the base
times the height right so the base let's
take this guy to be the base so the
length of the base will be length of a
then the height will be obtained by
taking B but only looking at the
vertical part so that will be length of
B times the S of theta okay so that's
how I got that the area of a
parallelogram is length a length b s
Theta and then I did this manipulation
and this trick of rotating to find a
nice
formula uh
yes uh so you're asking ahead of what
I'm going to do in a few minutes um so
you're asking about magnitude of A cross
B so going to learn about cross product
in a few minutes and the answer is yes
but cross product is for vectors in
space here I was simplifying things by
doing things just in the
plane okay so just bear with me for five
more minutes and we'll do things in
space uh
yes that's correct the way you compute
this in practice is you just do this
okay that's how you compute to
determinant
yes what
about so three dimensions we are going
to do now okay more questions should we
move to okay let's move to
space
so so there's two things we can do in
case and you know you can find you can
look for the volume of solid or you can
look for the area of surfaces so let me
start with easier of the two let me
start with volumes of solids and we'll
go back to area I
promise so I claim that there's also a
notion of determinant in space and
that's going to tell us how to find
volumes so let's say that we have three
vectors A B and
C and then the definition of their
determinant is going to be so the
notation for that in terms of the
components is the same as of there we
put the components of a the components
of B and the components of C
inside vertical bars
okay and of course I have to give a
meaning to this so this will be a number
and what is that number well the
definition I will take is that this is
A1 times the determinant of what I get
by looking in this lower right corner so
the 2x2 determinant 2 B3 C2
C3 then I will subtract A2 * the
determinant of B1 B3 C1
C3 and then I will add A3 times the
determinant B1 B2 C1
C2 and each of these guys means again
you take B2 * C3 minus C 2 * B3 and this
* that minus this * that and so on so in
fact there's a total of six terms in
here okay and maybe some of you have
already seen a different formula for 3x3
determinants where you directly have the
six terms it's the same it's the same
definition so how to remember the
structure of this
formula well it's called an this is
called an expansion according to the
first row so we're going to take the
entries in the first row A1 A2 A3 and
for each of them we get a term namely we
multiply it by a 2 by2 determinant that
we get by
deleting the first row and the column
where we are okay so here the
coefficient next to A1 is well we delete
this column and this row and we're left
with B2 B3 C2
C3 next the next one we take A2 we
delete the row that's in it and the
column that it's in and we left with B1
B3 C1 C3 and similarly with A3 we take
what remains that's B1 B2 C1 C2 finally
last but not least there's a minus sign
here for the second
guy
okay
so well it looks like a weird
formula and
I mean it is a little bit weird but it's
a formula that you should learn because
it's really really useful for a lot of
things um so I should say if this looks
very artificial to you and you like to
know more there's more in the notes so
read the notes they will tell you a bit
more about what this means where it
comes from and so on if you want to know
a lot more then someday you should take
1806 linear algebra where you will learn
a lot more about determinance in nend
dimensional space with n vectors and um
there's a generalization of this in
arbitrary dimensions in this class we
only deal with two or three
dimensions
yes sorry why is why is the negative
there well that's a very good question
it has to be there so that this will
actually equal well what I'm going to
say right now is that this will give us
the volume of the box with sides a b c
and the formula just doesn't work if you
don't put the negative
uh there's a more fundamental reason
which has to do with orientation of
space and the fact that if you switch
two coordinates in space then basically
you change What's called the handedness
of the coordinates um if you look at
your right hand and your left hand they
are not actually the same they're mirror
images and if you swap two coordinate
axes that's what you get that's the
fundamental reason for the minus but
again I mean we don't need to think too
much about that all we need in this
class is the formula
so why do we care about this formula
it's because of a
theorem that says
that
geometrically the
determinant of the three vectors A B
C is again plus or minus this
determinant could be positive or
negative see there's minuses and there's
all sorts of stuff plus or minus the
volume of the
parallelepiped that's just a fancy name
for a box with parallelogram sides in
case you
wonder with sides a b and c okay so you
take your three vectors A B and C
and you form a box whose sides are all
parallelograms and then its volume is
going to be the
determinant
okay um are
questions oh uh
back
I'm sorry I can't quite hear
you uh yes we are going to see how to do
it geometrically without a determinant
but then you'll see that you actually
need a determinant to compute it no
matter what so we're going to go back to
this and see another formula for volume
but you'll see that really I'm cheating
I mean the important way I mean somehow
computationally the only way to compute
it is really to use a
determinant
yes the
[Music]
determin that's correct in
general I mean actually I should say if
you look at the 2x two determinant see
you can also explain it in terms of this
expansion you take A1 and multiply by
this one by one determinant B2 then you
take A2 you multiply it by this 1 by one
determinant B1 but you put a minus sign
and in general indeed when you expand
you would start putting plus minus plus
minus
alternatingly um more about that in 1806
yes there's a way to do it based on
other rows as well but then you have to
be very careful with the sign factors so
I'll refer you to the notes for that
okay if you did it with I mean you could
also do it with a column by the way just
I mean be careful about the sign rules
so given how how little we'll use
determinants in this class I mean we'll
use them in a way that's fundamental but
we won't compute much so let's say this
is going to be enough for us for
now okay
so after determinant now I can tell you
about cross product and cross product is
going to be the answer to your question
about
area
for
okay
so okay so let me move on to cross
product so cross product is something
that you can apply to two
vectors in
space and by that I mean really in three
dimensional space okay this is something
that's specific to three
dimensions so the
definition A cross
B so it's important to really do your
multiplication symbol well so that you
don't mistake it with a DOT
product well that's going to be a
vector okay so that's another reason not
to confuse it with DOT product dot
product gives you a number
cross product gives you a vector so
they're really completely different
operations they're both called Product
because well somehow one couldn't come
up with a better name but they're
completely different operations okay so
what do we do to do the cross product of
A and B well we do something very
strange just after I've told you that a
determinant is something where we put
numbers and we get a number I'm going to
violate my own role I'm going
to put
together a
determinant in
which well the last two rows are the
components of the vectors A and B but
the first row strangely consists of the
unit vectors i j k what does that mean
well that certainly is not a determinant
in the usual sense you cannot you know
if you try to put that into your
calculator it will tell you there's an
error I don't know how to put vectors in
there I want numbers
uh what it means is it's a symbolic
notation that helps you remember what
the formula is so the actual formula is
well you use this definition and you
know if you use this
definition you see that it's IH hat
times some
number okay so let me write it as
determinant of A2 A3 B2 B3 * I
hat
minus determinant A1 A3 B1
B3 J hat plus A1 A2 B1
B2 K
hat okay and so that's the actual
definition in a way that makes complete
sense but to remember this formula
without too much trouble it's much
easier to think of it to think about it
in these terms
here okay so that's a definition and it
gives you a vector
now as usual with definitions the
question is what is it good for what is
the geometric meaning of this very
strange operation why do we bother to do
that so here's what it does
geometrically so remember a vector has
two different things it has a length and
it has a direction okay let's start with
a length
the length of a cross
product is the
area of the
parallelogram in
space formed by the vectors A and
B okay so now if you have a
parallelogram in space you can find it
area just by doing this calculation when
you know the coordinates of a
point you do this calculation and then
you take the length so the length you
know you take this square plus that
square plus that squar square
root it looks like a very complicated
formula but it works and actually it's
the simplest way to do
it okay this time we don't actually need
to put plus or minus because the length
of a vector is always positive we don't
have to worry about that
and what's even more magical is that not
only is the length remarkable but the
direction is also remarkable so the
direction of A cross
B is perpendicular to the plane of the
parallelogram
so you know our two vectors A and B
together the determine a
plane and what what I'm telling you is
that the vector A cross B will
point will stick straight out of that
plane perpendicularly to
it
okay so in fact I have to be more
precise there's two ways is that you can
be perpendic perpendicular to this plane
right you can be perpendicular pointing
up or pointing
down how do I decide
which
well there's something called the right
hand
rule okay so what does the right hand
rule say well there's various versions
of the right hand rule depending on in
which country you learn about it uh in
France given the culture you even learn
about it in terms of a crew and one
bottle but I think uh I'll just use the
usual version here um so you take your
right hand if you're left handed
remember to take your right hand not the
left one the other the other right okay
um and then place your hand to point in
the direction of a so let's say my right
hand is going in that direction now curl
your fingers so that they Point towards
B so here that would be kind of into the
Blackboard okay don't snap any bones if
it doesn't quite work and rotate your
arm so that you know you can actually
physically do
it then you know get your firm to stick
straight out well here my f is going to
go up and that tells me that A cross B
will go
up okay so let me write that down while
you experiment with
it again try not to injure
yourselves
so
first your right
hand
points parallel to Vector
a
then
fingers point in the direction of B then
your fum when you stick it out is going
to
point in the direction of A cross
B
okay let's do a quick
example what's my quick
example
here let's
take I cross
J
so I see some of you well most of you
have it going in the right
direction uh if you have it pointing in
the wrong direction it might mean that
you're using your left hand for example
Okay
so example I claim that I cross J equals
K okay let's see I points toward us J
points to our right so I guess this is
your right right I think it's kind of
hard to and then your Thum is going to
point up okay so that tells us it's
roughly pointing up uh and of course the
length should be one because if you take
the unit Square in the XY plane its area
is one and the direction should indeed
be vertical because it should be
perpendicular to the XY
plane
so looks like I cross J will be K well
let's check with a definition you
know I J K what is I I is 1 0 0 J is 0 1
0 well so the coefficient of I will be 0
* 0 - 0 * 1 that's
0 coefficient of J will be 1 * 0 - 0 * 0
that's
0us 0 J doesn't matter but and the
coefficient of
K will be 1 * 1 that's 1 minus 0 * 0 so
K okay so we do get i+ Jal K both
ways uh in this case it's easier to do
geometrically if I give you more
complicated vectors probably you will
actually want to do the
calculation okay any questions uh
yes ah so the coefficient of K remember
I take so I delete the first row and the
last column so I get this 2x two
determinant okay that 2x2 determinant is
1 * 1- 0 * 0 so that gives me 1
okay that's what you do with 2x two
determinants similarly for vs but vs
turn out to be
zero um more
questions uh yes let me repeat how I got
the one in front of K so remember the
definition of a
determinant I expand according to the
entries in the first row when I get to K
what I do is I delete the first row and
I delete the last column the column that
contains K okay so I delete these guys
and these guys I'm left with this 2x two
determinant now a 2X two determinant you
multiply according to this downward
diagonal and then minus this * that okay
so 1 *
1 let me say here I got 1K because
that's 1 * 1 minus 0 * 0 equals 1 sorry
and that's really hard to read maybe it
will be easier that
way
okay uh
yes ah okay so let's try if I do the
same for I I think I will also get zero
okay so let's do the same for I so I
take I I delete the first row I delete
the First Column I get this 2x two
determinant here and I get 0 * 0 that's
0us 0 * 1 that's here the trick question
0 * 1 is 0 as well so that's 0 minus 0
is
z
okay so I hope in Monday you should get
more practice in recitation about how to
compute determinants so hopefully will
become very easy for you all to compute
this
things I know the first time it's kind
of a shock because there's a lot of
numbers and a lot of things to
do
not
good
okay
so okay so let me return to the question
that you asked a bit earlier about how
do I find actually volume if I don't
want to know about
determinants
well so let's have another
look and for
volum okay
so let's say that I have three
vectors let me put them this way
a
b and c and let's try to see how else I
could think
about the volume of this
box
okay so probably you know that the
volume of a parallelepiped is the area
of a base times the
height okay
so sorry the
volume is the area of the
base times the
height how do we do that in practice
well what's the area of the base so the
base is a parallelogram in space with
sides B and C how do we find the area of
a parallelogram in space well we just
discovered that we can do it by taking
the cross product so the area of a base
well we take the cross product of B and
C that's not quite it because this is a
vector we would like a number well we
take its length Okay that's pretty good
what about the height well the height is
going to be the component of a in the
direction that's perpendicular to the
base so let's take a Direction that's
perpendicular to the base let's call
that n a unit Vector in that direction
then we can get the height by taking a
do n that's what we saw at the beginning
of class okay that a. n will tell me how
much a goes in the direction of
n okay are you still with
me okay let's keep
going
so let's think about this Vector n how
do I get
it well I can get it by actually using
cross product as well because I said the
direction perpendicular to two vectors I
can get by taking the cross product and
looking at that direction so this is
still B Cross C length and this one
is so I
claim I should do an aside here n can be
obtained by taking B Cross C well that
point in the right direction but it's
not a unit Vector how do I get a unit
Vector I divide by the
length thanks so I take B Cross C and I
divide by length B Cross
C well now I can probably simplify
between these two
guys and so what I will
get
oops it's going to be the last think for
today what I get out of this
is that my volume equals a DOT product
with the vector B Cross C and of course
I have to be careful in which order I do
it if I do it the other way around
a B I get a number I cannot cross that
so I mean I really have to do the cross
product first I get a new vector and
then I do
product okay so the fact is that the
determinant of
ABC is equal to this so-called triple
product well that looks good
geometrically let's try to check whether
it makes sense with the formulas just
one small thing so we saw the
determinant is A1 * determinant B2 B3 C2
C3 minus A2 * something plus A3 *
something I let you fill in the
numbers okay that's this
guy what about this guy well dot product
we take the first component of a that's
A1 we multiply by the first component of
b Cross C what's the first component of
b Cross C well it's this determinant
B2 B3 C2 C3 right if you look at if you
put B and C instead of A and B into
there you will get that the I component
is this guy minus well plus A2 * the
second component which is minus some
determinant plus A3 * the third
component which is again a determinant
and you can check you get exactly the
same expression so everything is fine uh
there's no contradiction in meth just
yet
okay
so well on Tuesday we'll continue with
this and we'll start going into matrices
equations of planes and so on uh
meanwhile have a good weekend and please
start working on your problem sets so
that you can ask lots of questions to
your Tas on
Monday